LISTEN TO THE TREES 

Section:
PHOTOGRAPHIC expression

Living in the Northeast--with its changing seasons, temperatures and quality of light--can be challenging and rewarding for photography students.
These conditions are especially well-suited for landscape photography. Majestic trees linger on the horizons, with their distinct character and quiet dignity which can be expressed well with black-and-white photography.
A tree's appearance is constantly changing. A photographer doesn't have to wait for seasonal changes to produce different photographic images: he or she need only wait for a cloud to pass or the sun to shift position in the sky.
Natural daylight can produce dramatic effects both in the morning and the late afternoon. Textural details of bark, branches and leaves are clearly defined. Midday sun creates deep, sharply defined shadows which serve to silhouette trees, as well as camouflage details. Overcast and low-light situations can produce poetic impressions.
Seasonal changes can alter the quality of light. Light is transient in nature and the use of light--illuminating trees moment to moment--provides attention to the refined sense of changes before our eyes. Light is not just illumination for trees but an important component for design in composition. Working with the quality of light and how black-and-white film responds to it is all important to the recognition of trees.
Black and white filters can enhance the appearance of trees. Red, yellow and green filters can produce various levels of dramatic contrast, especially when the sky is included in the photograph. Polarizing filters can penetrate through the haze and eliminate reflection around bodies of water, creating deeper and more meaningful spaces.
The art of working with light and its effects on trees begins by one's attention to the study of light. Combined with creative application of creative technique, the photographer may bring the photographic image to a higher level of artistic expression. The purpose of gaining technical skill in black-and-white photography should be to aid and improve visual expression.
Mastering photographic technique allows one to think less about skills and more about seeing--in this case, trees. The most effective photographs of trees are those which show their beauty and grandeur in a straightforward manner.
Trees provide the photographer with a well-spring of inspiration and awe. They are eloquent voices of nature that remind us of our life-cycle and feed our imaginations with an abundance of truth and beauty.
